+++
date = "2015-01-24"
title = "Dep"
description = ""
keywords = ["dep", "dependency", "git"]
categories = ["tools"]
+++

Dep is a Dependency Management Tool; its primary job is using SCM (eg. git) to record and keep the dependencies between different repositories up-to-date.

<!--more-->

> Note that as the software is currently (January 2015) under
> development the software and document may not match in
> functionality.

Background
----------

* Software is often built from [components].
* These components are typically released as new versions.
  * Though in development a component may rapidly change on one or more development branches.
* These components are each typically stored in a seperate source code repository.
* The repository is typically [Git], [Mercurial], [Subversion], [Perforce] or some
  other source code control system.
* Each component might be stored in seperate places in different source code control systems.
* Handling the relationship between all these components is usually a
  manual, error prone, tedious, and confusing ad-hoc system.

The Purpose of Dep
------------------

[Dep] automates retrieving the right dependencies at the right version
in a **predictable**, **portable**, **automatable** and **sensible** fashion:

* **Predictible** - The specific version of a dependency used is
  specified exactly as a source code repository commit revision or
  identifier. This is immutable and reproducible (assuming the source
  code repository and system guarantee this).
* **Predictible** - The list of all direct dependencies, names,
  locations and revisions are specified in the file `.depconfig` at
  the root of the component. The `.depconfig` file should be stored
  and version controlled using component's source code control system.
* **Portable** - [Dep] is written in [Python] and should run
  on any system that runs [Python]. Examples include; Linux, Mac OS X, and Windows.
  The same commands should be used on all systems to produce the same results.
* **Automatable** - The [Dep] program is command-line only; it can be
  used manually from the command line, but often it will be called
  from Makefiles, build scripts and/or by continous integration
  systems.
* **Sensible** - [Dep] correctly handles component dependency chains
  as a *Directed Acyclic Graph* (or DAG):
  * *Trees allowed* - A component can itself depend on further components; the component
	will have it's own `.depconfig` which describes it's dependencies.
  * *Shared dependencies allowed* - The same component can be used as a
	dependency more than once; for example *A* depends on *B* depends on *D*,
	and *A* depends on *C* which depends on *D*, here *D* is required twice.
  * *Recursion disallowed* - Component dependency cycles are not
	allowed. For example *A* depending on *B*, where *B* depends on *A* 
	is not allowed, either directly or indirectly. Good software
	developers learn to invert their dependencies using interfaces or
	similar techniques (See [Dependency Inversion Principle]).
  * *Version mismatches disallowed* - If a dependency is used twice,
    it has to be at exactly the same revision. In the previous example
    *D* must be at the same revision. The software engineer must
    manually resolve and fix version mismatches before `dep record`
    can succeed, and thus the dependency tree can never have version
    mismatches.
* **Sensible** - [Dep] does one thing only; manage dependencies. This follows
  the *Unix* philosophy of small simple programs working together to build complex workflows.
* **Sensible** - [Dep] leverages source code revision systems to get
  dependencies, stores state in one local file `.depconfig` and
  assumes that once you are happy you commit changes to that file to
  make it reproducible.
* **Sensible** - [Dep] tries to be simple, but allows complexity if required.
* **Sensible** - [Dep] tries not to suprise you; it does the most sensible thing by default
  and telling you what it did just to make sure.
* **Sensible** - [Dep] flattens the DAG of all dependencies to the
  unique set, stored by default in the root project's `dep`
  directory. All sub-dependencies use *symbolic links* back to these
  as required.

Supported Source Code Revision Systems
--------------------------------------

Currently:

* [Git]

Proposed:

* [Mercurial]
* [Subversion]
* [Perforce]

By Example
----------

Let's show how to use [Dep] with an example. Here we will use [Git] as
a source code revision system, but eventually it will be possible to mix [Git],
[Mercurial], [Subversion], [Perforce] or any other supported system in
any way; each dependency can be in a different source code revision
system.

Our "project" will have a "main" component, which depends on a "helper" component.

### Initialise

Let's assume that the "main" component already exists and has an
associated [Git] repository. First we need initialise the use of [Dep]
style dependencies in a "main" component:

```bash
$ cd .../project/main
$ dep init
Writg Config ".../project/main/.depconfig"
```

This will create a default `.depconfig` in the current directory such
that dependent components can be added. Also [Dep] will automatically
call `git add .depconfig` to register the newly added `.depconfig`
file with [Git].

A dependent component need not have a `.depconfig` file, in which case
it is a "leaf" component (it is assumed that it does not depend on
anything else, unless that is completely automated by the component
itself).

The `.depconfig` should be eventually be committed to the "main"
component source repository, perhaps with other changes. In this example we use [Git]:

```bash
$ git commit -m "Added dependency information."
```

### Add A Dependency

Add a [Dep] managed dependency on a "helper" component stored in [Git]:

```bash
$ dep add http://example.com/cool-components/helper.git
Downloading GitRepository '.../project/main/dep/helper.git'
    from 'http://example.com/cool-components/helper.git'
Cloning into '.../project/main/dep/helper'...
done.
Checkout GitRepository '.../project/main/dep/helper/.git'
    in '.../project/main/dep/helper'
Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/master'.
Recording GitRepository '.../project/main/dep/helper/.git'
    at commit 'f2a356f08f536dd91e64996bbf9ac2f4ec6edc4b'
    on branch 'refs/heads/master'
Writing Config '.../project/main/.depconfig'
```

By default the dependency source code system and name is determined
from the URL.

By default the dependency is downloaded from the source code system at
the latest revision on the default branch, and stored under the `dep`
directory in a sub-directory of the same name as the component, in
this example `dep/helper`.

The dependency is added to the `.depconfig` file at this particular
revision, and is automatically added to [Git] using `git add
.depconfig`. 

With [Git] the `.gitingore` file is modified to include the new
dependency directory `dep/helper` such that it is ignored in the main
repository; the component itself has it's own [Git] repository. This
change is also automatically added using `git add .gitignore`.

These two files should be committed to "main" source repository, in
this example using [Git]:

```bash
$ git commit -m "Added helper component."
```

### Changing Dependency Version

Changing the revision or version of "component" is typically a four step process:

* Use the component's source code revision system to change
  state. This could be checking out a different revision, or it could
  be making local changes and commiting these.
* Build and test everything still works!
* Use `dep record` once complete to record all dependencies state on the main project.
* Commit using the "main" project source code revision system.

In this example we'll change to a specific tagged version using [Git]:

```bash
$ cd .../project/main/dep/helper
$ git checkout v1.0.0
$ cd ../..
$ make build test
...
$ dep record
Recording GitRepository '.../project/main/dep/helper'
    at commit '16a2b4e8b7c66f16cf25b74f9740a582f6a25f95'
    on branch 'refs/heads/master'
Writing Config '.../project/main/.depconfig'
$ git commit -m 'Changed helper to v1.0.0'
```

### Ensure Dependencies Are Present

When the primary component is first cloned, sync'd or retrieved from
it's source code revision system, the dependencies will not be
present. To ensure they are present and correct use `dep refresh`:

```bash
$ cd .../project
$ git clone http://example.com/cool-components/main.git
Cloning into 'main'...
done.
$ cd main
$ dep refresh
Downloading GitRepository '.../project/main/dep/helper/.git'
    from 'http://example.com/cool-components/helper.git'
Cloning into '.../project/main/dep/helper'...
done.
Checkout GitRepository '.../project/main/dep/helper/.git'
    on branch 'refs/heads/master'
    at commit '16a2b4e8b7c66f16cf25b74f9740a582f6a25f95'
    in '.../project/main/dep/helper'
```

### Checking The Status of Dependencies

Since a project consists of many components with many different source
revisions [Dep] provides a way to briefly show the status of all dependencies and their
repositories:

```bash
$ cd .../project
$ dep status
M  Branch           Commit                                    Ahead Behind Path
-- ---------------  ---------------------------------------- ------ ------ -----------------------
   master           7e67b94b71edffc569045c2fe67d67fea1413603      0      0 .
   master           16a2b4e8b7c66f16cf25b74f9740a582f6a25f95      0      0 dep/helper
```

* "M" column:
  * Shows a "*" if there are any local modifications to each
    component; any files added, removed or modified.
  * A "*" means you should do `git add`, `git rm` and/or `git commit`.
* "Branch" and "Commit" columns:
  * Show the currently recorded branch and commit in the `.depconfig` file.
  * Each may preceded by a "*" if they do not match the current local state.
  * A "*" means you should do `dep record` to record the new dependency commit/branches.
* "Ahead" shows how far each component is ahead of the remote repository.
  * If non-zero, this for means you need to do a `git push` to push those changes.
* "Behind" shows how far each component is behind the remote repository.
  * If non-zero, this for means you need to do a `git pull` to pull those changes, if required.
  * You may not need to do this if you need a particular version of the component.
  * Note that you will need to do a `git fetch` for this to display correctly.
* "Path" shows the relative path to the component.

### Listing All Components

List all the components using `dep list`.

The default is to list only the names of all components, including
the root. The list includes both implicit and explicit, as if the DAG
was visited in a unique depth first ordering; that is all dependencies from the deepest up to the root component in the order that each would need building:

```bash
$ dep list
helper
main
```

There are various aliases and options that can change what is
listed. For example; list all the components as absolute path names:

```bash
$ dep list --path
.../project/main/dep/helper
.../project/main
```

### Run A Command For All Components

You can run a shell command for each component using `dep foreach`. This runs a command on all dependencies in the unique depth-first ordering.

For example the following would run `git push` in each component including the root:

```bash
$ dep foreach git push
##================================================================================
-> pushd .../project/main/dep/helper:
-> git push
Counting objects: 79, done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (79/79), done.
Writing objects: 100% (79/79), 8.53 KiB | 0 bytes/s, done.
Total 79 (delta 45), reused 0 (delta 0)
To http://example.com/cool-components/helper.git
   9f23f65..123f788  master -> master
-> popd
##================================================================================
-> pushd .../project/main
-> git push
Counting objects: 79, done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads.
Compressing objects: 100% (79/79), done.
Writing objects: 100% (79/79), 8.53 KiB | 0 bytes/s, done.
Total 79 (delta 45), reused 0 (delta 0)
To http://example.com/cool-components/main.git
   8e73fdd..103e878  master -> master
-> popd
```

This would run "pwd" on all components:

```bash
$ dep -q foreach pwd
.../project/main/dep/helper
.../project/main
```

The command may also include variables which are expanded for each
repository. These names always start with a '%' symbol and include:

* `%name` - The name of the dependency.
* `%path` - The absoluate path of the dependency.
* `%parent` - The name of the parent of this dependency, or blank if the root.
* `%children` - The explicit children of this dependency.
* `%relpath` - The relative path of the dependency to it's parent dependency, or "." if root.
* `%url` - The url of the remote source repository the dependency came from.
* `%vcs` - The version control system used for this dependency.
* `%commit` - The currently recorded commit for the dependency.
* `%branch` - The currently recorded branch for the dependency.
* `%local_commit` - The current local commit for the dependency.
* `%local_branch` - The current local branch for the dependency.

```bash
$ dep -q foreach echo Name: %name Path: %path VCS: %vcs
Name: helper Path: .../project/main/dep/helper VCS: git
Name: main Path: .../project/main VCS: git
```

### Helpers And Shortcuts

There are some often used commands which have short-cuts:

* `dep commit` - Equivalent to `dep foreach git commit`
  * Commits all dependency local changes to the local repositories.
* `dep push` - Equivalent to `dep foreach dep push`
  * Pushes all dependencies repositories to the remote.
* `dep fetch` - Equivalent to `dep foreach dep fetch`
  * Fetches, but does not pull, all dependencies repositories to the remote.
* `dep pull` - Equivalent to `dep foreach dep pull`
  * Pulls all dependencies repositories from the remote into the local.


Further Reading
---------------

* Look at the GitHub [dep] project to see the latest status of the source.
* Use `dep help`, `dep --help`, `dep -h` to get help!
* Use `dep help command`, `dep command --help`, `dep command -h` to
  get a specific help on a given command.

[dep]: https://github.com/harveyt/dep
[components]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Component-based_software_engineering
[git]: http://git-scm.com
[mercurial]: http://mercurial.selenic.com
[subversion]: https://subversion.apache.org
[perforce]: http://www.perforce.com
[python]: https://www.python.org
[dependency inversion principle]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_inversion_principle
